ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Helen, Widow, and Diana, with two Attendants.]


HELEN
But this exceeding posting day and night
Must wear your spirits low. We cannot help it.
But since you have made the days and nights as one
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital
As nothing can unroot you.

[Enter a Gentleman, a gentle Astringer.]

In happy time!
This man may help me to his Majesty's ear,
If he would spend his power.--God save you, sir.

GENTLEMAN  And you.

HELEN
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.

GENTLEMAN  I have been sometimes there.

HELEN
I do presume, sir, that you are not fall'n
From the report that goes upon your goodness,
And therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
I shall continue thankful.

GENTLEMAN  What's your will?

HELEN, [taking out a paper]  That it will please you
To give this poor petition to the King
And aid me with that store of power you have
To come into his presence.

GENTLEMAN
The King's not here.

HELEN  Not here, sir?

GENTLEMAN  Not indeed.
He hence removed last night, and with more haste
Than is his use.

WIDOW  Lord, how we lose our pains!

HELEN  All's well that ends well yet,
Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.--
I do beseech you, whither is he gone?

GENTLEMAN
Marry, as I take it, to Rossillion,
Whither I am going.

HELEN, [giving him the paper]  I do beseech you, sir,
Since you are like to see the King before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame
But rather make you thank your pains for it.
I will come after you with what good speed
Our means will make us means.

GENTLEMAN  This I'll do for you.

HELEN
And you shall find yourself to be well thanked
Whate'er falls more. We must to horse again.--
Go, go, provide.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Fool and Parolles.]


PAROLLES, [holding out a paper]  Good Monsieur
Lavatch, give my lord Lafew this letter. I have ere
now, sir, been better known to you, when I have
held familiarity with fresher clothes. But I am
now, sir, muddied in Fortune's mood, and smell
somewhat strong of her strong displeasure.

FOOL  Truly, Fortune's displeasure is but sluttish if it
smell so strongly as thou speak'st of. I will henceforth
eat no fish of Fortune's butt'ring. Prithee,
allow the wind.

PAROLLES  Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir. I
spake but by a metaphor.

FOOL  Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink I will stop my
nose, or against any man's metaphor. Prithee, get
thee further.

PAROLLES  Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.

FOOL  Foh! Prithee, stand away. A paper from Fortune's
close-stool, to give to a nobleman!

[Enter Lafew.]

Look, here he comes himself.--Here is a purr of
Fortune's, sir, or of Fortune's cat--but not a
musk-cat--that has fall'n into the unclean fishpond
of her displeasure and, as he says, is muddied
withal. Pray you, sir, use the carp as you may,
for he looks like a poor, decayed, ingenious, foolish,
rascally knave. I do pity his distress in my
smiles of comfort, and leave him to your Lordship.
[He exits.]

PAROLLES  My lord, I am a man whom Fortune hath
cruelly scratched.

LAFEW  And what would you have me to do? 'Tis too
late to pare her nails now. Wherein have you
played the knave with Fortune that she should
scratch you, who of herself is a good lady and
would not have knaves thrive long under her?
There's a cardecu for you. Let the justices make
you and Fortune friends. I am for other business.

PAROLLES  I beseech your Honor to hear me one single
word.

LAFEW  You beg a single penny more. Come, you shall
ha 't. Save your word.

PAROLLES  My name, my good lord, is Parolles.

LAFEW  You beg more than a word, then. Cock's my
passion; give me your hand. How does your drum?

PAROLLES  O my good lord, you were the first that
found me.

LAFEW  Was I, in sooth? And I was the first that lost
thee.

PAROLLES  It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some
grace, for you did bring me out.

LAFEW  Out upon thee, knave! Dost thou put upon me
at once both the office of God and the devil? One
brings thee in grace, and the other brings thee out.
[Trumpets sound.] The King's coming. I know by
his trumpets. Sirrah, inquire further after me. I
had talk of you last night. Though you are a fool
and a knave, you shall eat. Go to, follow.

PAROLLES  I praise God for you.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Flourish. Enter King, Countess, Lafew, the two French
Lords, with Attendants.]


KING
We lost a jewel of her, and our esteem
Was made much poorer by it. But your son,
As mad in folly, lacked the sense to know
Her estimation home.

COUNTESS  'Tis past, my liege,
And I beseech your Majesty to make it
Natural rebellion done i' th' blade of youth,
When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force,
O'erbears it and burns on.

KING  My honored lady,
I have forgiven and forgotten all,
Though my revenges were high bent upon him
And watched the time to shoot.

LAFEW  This I must say--
But first I beg my pardon: the young lord
Did to his Majesty, his mother, and his lady
Offense of mighty note, but to himself
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive,
Whose dear perfection hearts that scorned to serve
Humbly called mistress.

KING  Praising what is lost
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither.
We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill
All repetition. Let him not ask our pardon.
The nature of his great offense is dead,
And deeper than oblivion we do bury
Th' incensing relics of it. Let him approach
A stranger, no offender, and inform him
So 'tis our will he should.

GENTLEMAN  I shall, my liege.	[He exits.]

KING
What says he to your daughter? Have you spoke?

LAFEW
All that he is hath reference to your Highness.

KING
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me
That sets him high in fame.

[Enter Count Bertram.]


LAFEW  He looks well on 't.

KING  I am not a day of season,
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail
In me at once. But to the brightest beams
Distracted clouds give way. So stand thou forth.
The time is fair again.

BERTRAM  My high-repented blames,
Dear sovereign, pardon to me.

KING  All is whole.
Not one word more of the consumed time.
Let's take the instant by the forward top,
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
Th' inaudible and noiseless foot of time
Steals ere we can effect them. You remember
The daughter of this lord?

BERTRAM  Admiringly, my liege. At first
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue;
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
Which warped the line of every other favor,
Scorned a fair color or expressed it stol'n,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object. Thence it came
That she whom all men praised and whom myself,
Since I have lost, have loved, was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.

KING  Well excused.
That thou didst love her strikes some scores away
From the great compt. But love that comes too late,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
To the great sender turns a sour offense,
Crying "That's good that's gone!" Our rash faults
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them until we know their grave.
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
Destroy our friends and after weep their dust.
Our own love, waking, cries to see what's done,
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin.
The main consents are had, and here we'll stay
To see our widower's second marriage day.

COUNTESS
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless,
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!

LAFEW
Come on, my son, in whom my house's name
Must be digested, give a favor from you
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
That she may quickly come.
[Bertram gives him a ring.]
By my old beard
And ev'ry hair that's on 't, Helen that's dead
Was a sweet creature. Such a ring as this,
The last that e'er I took her leave at court,
I saw upon her finger.

BERTRAM  Hers it was not.

KING
Now, pray you, let me see it, for mine eye,
While I was speaking, oft was fastened to 't.
[Lafew passes the ring to the King.]
This ring was mine, and when I gave it Helen,
I bade her if her fortunes ever stood
Necessitied to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. [To Bertram.] Had you that craft to
reave her
Of what should stead her most?

BERTRAM  My gracious
sovereign,
Howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers.

COUNTESS  Son, on my life,
I have seen her wear it, and she reckoned it
At her life's rate.

LAFEW  I am sure I saw her wear it.

BERTRAM
You are deceived, my lord. She never saw it.
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrapped in a paper which contained the name
Of her that threw it. Noble she was, and thought
I stood ungaged, but when I had subscribed
To mine own fortune and informed her fully
I could not answer in that course of honor
As she had made the overture, she ceased
In heavy satisfaction and would never
Receive the ring again.

KING  Plutus himself,
That knows the tinct and multiplying med'cine,
Hath not in nature's mystery more science
Than I have in this ring. 'Twas mine, 'twas Helen's,
Whoever gave it you. Then if you know
That you are well acquainted with yourself,
Confess 'twas hers and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her. She called the saints to surety
That she would never put it from her finger
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed,
Where you have never come, or sent it us
Upon her great disaster.

BERTRAM  She never saw it.

KING
Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honor,
And mak'st conjectural fears to come into me
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove
That thou art so inhuman--'twill not prove so,
And yet I know not. Thou didst hate her deadly,
And she is dead, which nothing but to close
Her eyes myself could win me to believe
More than to see this ring.--Take him away.
My forepast proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
Shall tax my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly feared too little. Away with him.
We'll sift this matter further.

BERTRAM  If you shall prove
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where yet she never was.	[He exits, under guard.]

KING
I am wrapped in dismal thinkings.

[Enter a Gentleman.]


GENTLEMAN  Gracious sovereign,
Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not.
[He gives the King a paper.]
Here's a petition from a Florentine
Who hath for four or five removes come short
To tender it herself. I undertook it,
Vanquished thereto by the fair grace and speech
Of the poor suppliant, who, by this, I know
Is here attending. Her business looks in her
With an importing visage, and she told me,
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
Your Highness with herself.

KING [reads]  Upon his many protestations to marry me
when his wife was dead, I blush to say it, he won
me. Now is the Count Rossillion a widower, his
vows are forfeited to me and my honor's paid to him.
He stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow
him to his country for justice. Grant it me, O king.
In you it best lies. Otherwise a seducer flourishes,
and a poor maid is undone.
Diana Capilet.

LAFEW  I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for
this. I'll none of him.

KING
The heavens have thought well on thee, Lafew,
To bring forth this discov'ry.--Seek these suitors.
Go speedily, and bring again the Count.
[Gentleman and Attendants exit.]
I am afeard the life of Helen, lady,
Was foully snatched.

COUNTESS  Now justice on the doers!

[Enter Bertram under guard.]


KING
I wonder, sir, since wives are monsters to you
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
Yet you desire to marry.

[Enter Widow and Diana.]

What woman's that?

DIANA
I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine,
Derived from the ancient Capilet.
My suit, as I do understand, you know
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.

WIDOW
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honor
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease without your remedy.

KING
Come hither, count. Do you know these women?

BERTRAM
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
But that I know them. Do they charge me further?

DIANA
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?

BERTRAM
She's none of mine, my lord.

DIANA  If you shall marry,
You give away this hand, and that is mine;
You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine;
You give away myself, which is known mine,
For I by vow am so embodied yours
That she which marries you must marry me,
Either both or none.

LAFEW, [to Bertram]  Your reputation comes too short
for my daughter. You are no husband for her.

BERTRAM, [to the King]
My lord, this is a fond and desp'rate creature
Whom sometime I have laughed with. Let your
Highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honor
Than for to think that I would sink it here.

KING
Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
Till your deeds gain them. Fairer prove your honor
Than in my thought it lies.

DIANA  Good my lord,
Ask him upon his oath if he does think
He had not my virginity.

KING
What sayst thou to her?

BERTRAM  She's impudent, my lord,
And was a common gamester to the camp.

DIANA
He does me wrong, my lord. If I were so,
He might have bought me at a common price.
Do not believe him. O, behold this ring,
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a parallel. Yet for all that
He gave it to a commoner o' th' camp,
If I be one.

COUNTESS  He blushes, and 'tis hit.
Of six preceding ancestors that gem,
Conferred by testament to th' sequent issue,
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife.
That ring's a thousand proofs.

KING, [to Diana]  Methought you said
You saw one here in court could witness it.

DIANA
I did, my lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an instrument. His name's Parolles.

LAFEW
I saw the man today, if man he be.

KING
Find him, and bring him hither.	[Attendant exits.]

BERTRAM  What of him?
He's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
With all the spots o' th' world taxed and debauched,
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
Am I or that or this for what he'll utter,
That will speak anything?

KING  She hath that ring of yours.

BERTRAM
I think she has. Certain it is I liked her
And boarded her i' th' wanton way of youth.
She knew her distance and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancy's course
Are motives of more fancy; and in fine
Her infinite cunning with her modern grace
Subdued me to her rate. She got the ring,
And I had that which any inferior might
At market price have bought.

DIANA  I must be patient.
You that have turned off a first so noble wife
May justly diet me. I pray you yet--
Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband--
Send for your ring. I will return it home,
And give me mine again.

BERTRAM  I have it not.

KING, [to Diana]  What ring was yours, I pray you?

DIANA
Sir, much like the same upon your finger.

KING
Know you this ring? This ring was his of late.

DIANA
And this was it I gave him, being abed.

KING
The story, then, goes false you threw it him
Out of a casement?

DIANA  I have spoke the truth.

[Enter Parolles.]


BERTRAM
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.

KING
You boggle shrewdly. Every feather starts you.--
Is this the man you speak of?

DIANA  Ay, my lord.

KING
Tell me, sirrah--but tell me true, I charge you,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
Which, on your just proceeding, I'll keep off--
By him and by this woman here what know you?

PAROLLES  So please your Majesty, my master hath
been an honorable gentleman. Tricks he hath had
in him which gentlemen have.

KING  Come, come, to th' purpose. Did he love this
woman?

PAROLLES  Faith, sir, he did love her, but how?

KING  How, I pray you?

PAROLLES  He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a
woman.

KING  How is that?

PAROLLES  He loved her, sir, and loved her not.

KING  As thou art a knave and no knave. What an
equivocal companion is this!

PAROLLES  I am a poor man, and at your Majesty's
command.

LAFEW  He's a good drum, my lord, but a naughty
orator.

DIANA  Do you know he promised me marriage?

PAROLLES  Faith, I know more than I'll speak.

KING  But wilt thou not speak all thou know'st?

PAROLLES  Yes, so please your Majesty. I did go
between them, as I said; but more than that he
loved her, for indeed he was mad for her, and
talked of Satan and of limbo and of furies and I
know not what. Yet I was in that credit with them
at that time, that I knew of their going to bed and
of other motions, as promising her marriage, and
things which would derive me ill will to speak of.
Therefore I will not speak what I know.

KING  Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst
say they are married. But thou art too fine in thy
evidence. Therefore stand aside.
[To Diana.]
This ring you say was yours?

DIANA  Ay, my good lord.

KING
Where did you buy it? Or who gave it you?

DIANA
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.

KING
Who lent it you?

DIANA  It was not lent me neither.

KING
Where did you find it then?

DIANA  I found it not.

KING
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
How could you give it him?

DIANA  I never gave it him.

LAFEW  This woman's an easy glove, my lord; she goes
off and on at pleasure.

KING
This ring was mine. I gave it his first wife.

DIANA
It might be yours or hers for aught I know.

KING, [to Attendants]
Take her away. I do not like her now.
To prison with her, and away with him.--
Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring,
Thou diest within this hour.

DIANA  I'll never tell you.

KING
Take her away.

DIANA  I'll put in bail, my liege.

KING
I think thee now some common customer.

DIANA, [to Bertram]
By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you.

KING
Wherefore hast thou accused him all this while?

DIANA
Because he's guilty and he is not guilty.
He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to 't.
I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not.
Great king, I am no strumpet. By my life,
I am either maid or else this old man's wife.

KING
She does abuse our ears. To prison with her.

DIANA
Good mother, fetch my bail. [Widow exits.] Stay,
royal sir.
The jeweler that owes the ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me. But for this lord
Who hath abused me as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harmed me, here I quit him.
He knows himself my bed he hath defiled,
And at that time he got his wife with child.
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick.
So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick.
And now behold the meaning.

[Enter Helen and Widow.]


KING  Is there no exorcist
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
Is 't real that I see?

HELEN  No, my good lord,
'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
The name and not the thing.

BERTRAM  Both, both. O, pardon!

HELEN
O, my good lord, when I was like this maid,
I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring,
And, look you, here's your letter. [She takes out a
paper.] This it says:
When from my finger you can get this ring
And are by me with child, etc. This is done.
Will you be mine now you are doubly won?

BERTRAM
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.

HELEN
If it appear not plain and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you.--
O my dear mother, do I see you living?

LAFEW
Mine eyes smell onions. I shall weep anon.--
[To Parolles.] Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher.
So, I thank thee. Wait on me home.
I'll make sport with thee. Let thy courtesies alone.
They are scurvy ones.

KING
Let us from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
[To Diana.] If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped flower,
Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower.
For I can guess that by thy honest aid
Thou kept'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.
Of that and all the progress more and less,
Resolvedly more leisure shall express.
All yet seems well, and if it end so meet,
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.
[Flourish.]

EPILOGUE
========

The King's a beggar, now the play is done.
All is well ended if this suit be won,
That you express content, which we will pay,
With strift to please you, day exceeding day.
Ours be your patience, then, and yours our parts.
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts.
[All exit.]
