ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter one of the French Lords, with five or six other
Soldiers in ambush.]


LORD  He can come no other way but by this hedge
corner. When you sally upon him, speak what terrible
language you will. Though you understand it
not yourselves, no matter. For we must not seem to
understand him, unless some one among us whom
we must produce for an interpreter.

FIRST SOLDIER  Good captain, let me be th' interpreter.

LORD  Art not acquainted with him? Knows he not thy
voice?

FIRST SOLDIER  No, sir, I warrant you.

LORD  But what linsey-woolsey hast thou to speak to
us again?

FIRST SOLDIER  E'en such as you speak to me.

LORD  He must think us some band of strangers i' th'
adversary's entertainment. Now, he hath a smack
of all neighboring languages. Therefore we must
every one be a man of his own fancy, not to know
what we speak one to another. So we seem to know
is to know straight our purpose: choughs' language,
gabble enough and good enough. As for
you, interpreter, you must seem very politic. But
couch, ho! Here he comes to beguile two hours in
a sleep and then to return and swear the lies he
forges.	[They move aside.]

[Enter Parolles.]


PAROLLES  Ten o'clock. Within these three hours 'twill
be time enough to go home. What shall I say I have
done? It must be a very plausive invention that
carries it. They begin to smoke me, and disgraces
have of late knocked too often at my door. I find
my tongue is too foolhardy, but my heart hath the
fear of Mars before it, and of his creatures, not
daring the reports of my tongue.

LORD, [aside]  This is the first truth that e'er thine own
tongue was guilty of.

PAROLLES  What the devil should move me to undertake
the recovery of this drum, being not ignorant
of the impossibility and knowing I had no such
purpose? I must give myself some hurts and say I
got them in exploit. Yet slight ones will not carry it.
They will say "Came you off with so little?" And
great ones I dare not give. Wherefore? What's the
instance? Tongue, I must put you into a butter-woman's
mouth and buy myself another of
Bajazeth's mule if you prattle me into these perils.

LORD, [aside]  Is it possible he should know what he is,
and be that he is?

PAROLLES  I would the cutting of my garments would
serve the turn, or the breaking of my Spanish
sword.

LORD, [aside]  We cannot afford you so.

PAROLLES  Or the baring of my beard, and to say it was
in stratagem.

LORD, [aside]  'Twould not do.

PAROLLES  Or to drown my clothes and say I was
stripped.

LORD, [aside]  Hardly serve.

PAROLLES  Though I swore I leapt from the window of
the citadel--

LORD, [aside]  How deep?

PAROLLES  Thirty fathom.

LORD, [aside]  Three great oaths would scarce make
that be believed.

PAROLLES  I would I had any drum of the enemy's. I
would swear I recovered it.

LORD, [aside]  You shall hear one anon.

PAROLLES  A drum, now, of the enemy's--
[Alarum within.]

LORD, [advancing]  Throca movousus, cargo, cargo,
cargo.

ALL  Cargo, cargo, cargo, villianda par corbo, cargo.
[They seize him.]

PAROLLES  O ransom, ransom! Do not hide mine eyes.
[They blindfold him.]

FIRST SOLDIER  Boskos thromuldo boskos.

PAROLLES
I know you are the Muskos' regiment,
And I shall lose my life for want of language.
If there be here German or Dane, Low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me.
I'll discover that which shall undo the Florentine.

FIRST SOLDIER  Boskos vauvado, I understand thee and
can speak thy tongue. Kerelybonto, sir, betake thee
to thy faith, for seventeen poniards are at thy
bosom.

PAROLLES  O!

FIRST SOLDIER  O, pray, pray, pray! Manka reuania
dulche.

LORD  Oscorbidulchos voliuorco.

FIRST SOLDIER
The General is content to spare thee yet
And, hoodwinked as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee. Haply thou mayst inform
Something to save thy life.

PAROLLES  O, let me live,
And all the secrets of our camp I'll show,
Their force, their purposes. Nay, I'll speak that
Which you will wonder at.

FIRST SOLDIER  But wilt thou faithfully?

PAROLLES  If I do not, damn me.

FIRST SOLDIER  Acordo linta. Come on, thou art
granted space.
[He exits with Parolles under guard.]
[A short alarum within.]

LORD
Go tell the Count Rossillion and my brother
We have caught the woodcock and will keep him
muffled
Till we do hear from them.

SECOND SOLDIER  Captain, I will.

LORD
He will betray us all unto ourselves.
Inform on that.

SECOND SOLDIER  So I will, sir.

LORD
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely locked.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Bertram and the maid called Diana.]


BERTRAM
They told me that your name was Fontibell.

DIANA
No, my good lord, Diana.

BERTRAM  Titled goddess,
And worth it, with addition. But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no maiden but a monument.
When you are dead, you should be such a one
As you are now, for you are cold and stern,
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self was got.

DIANA
She then was honest.

BERTRAM  So should you be.

DIANA  No.
My mother did but duty--such, my lord,
As you owe to your wife.

BERTRAM  No more o' that.
I prithee do not strive against my vows.
I was compelled to her, but I love thee
By love's own sweet constraint, and will forever
Do thee all rights of service.

DIANA  Ay, so you serve us
Till we serve you. But when you have our roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves
And mock us with our bareness.

BERTRAM  How have I sworn!

DIANA
'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
But the plain single vow that is vowed true.
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the high'st to witness. Then pray you, tell
me,
If I should swear by Jove's great attributes
I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths
When I did love you ill? This has no holding
To swear by him whom I protest to love
That I will work against him. Therefore your oaths
Are words, and poor conditions but unsealed,
At least in my opinion.

BERTRAM  Change it, change it.
Be not so holy-cruel. Love is holy,
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto my sick desires,
Who then recovers. Say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins shall so persever.

DIANA
I see that men may rope 's in such a snare
That we'll forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.

BERTRAM
I'll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power
To give it from me.

DIANA  Will you not, my lord?

BERTRAM
It is an honor 'longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose.

DIANA  Mine honor's such a ring.
My chastity's the jewel of our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose. Thus your own proper wisdom
Brings in the champion Honor on my part
Against your vain assault.

BERTRAM  Here, take my ring.
My house, mine honor, yea, my life be thine,
And I'll be bid by thee.

DIANA
When midnight comes, knock at my chamber
window.
I'll order take my mother shall not hear.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquered my yet maiden bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me.
My reasons are most strong, and you shall know them
When back again this ring shall be delivered.
And on your finger in the night I'll put
Another ring, that what in time proceeds
May token to the future our past deeds.
Adieu till then; then, fail not. You have won
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.

BERTRAM
A heaven on Earth I have won by wooing thee.

DIANA
For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
You may so in the end.	[He exits.]
My mother told me just how he would woo
As if she sat in 's heart. She says all men
Have the like oaths. He had sworn to marry me
When his wife's dead. Therefore I'll lie with him
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
Marry that will, I live and die a maid.
Only, in this disguise I think 't no sin
To cozen him that would unjustly win.
[She exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter the two French Lords and some two
or three Soldiers.]


FIRST LORD  You have not given him his mother's
letter?

SECOND LORD  I have delivered it an hour since. There
is something in 't that stings his nature, for on the
reading it he changed almost into another man.

FIRST LORD  He has much worthy blame laid upon him
for shaking off so good a wife and so sweet a lady.

SECOND LORD  Especially he hath incurred the everlasting
displeasure of the King, who had even tuned
his bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you
a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.

FIRST LORD  When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I
am the grave of it.

SECOND LORD  He hath perverted a young gentlewoman
here in Florence of a most chaste renown,
and this night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her
honor. He hath given her his monumental ring and
thinks himself made in the unchaste composition.

FIRST LORD  Now God delay our rebellion! As we are
ourselves, what things are we!

SECOND LORD  Merely our own traitors. And, as in the
common course of all treasons we still see them
reveal themselves till they attain to their abhorred
ends, so he that in this action contrives against his
own nobility, in his proper stream o'erflows
himself.

FIRST LORD  Is it not meant damnable in us to be trumpeters
of our unlawful intents? We shall not, then,
have his company tonight?

SECOND LORD  Not till after midnight, for he is dieted to
his hour.

FIRST LORD  That approaches apace. I would gladly
have him see his company anatomized, that he
might take a measure of his own judgments
wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit.

SECOND LORD  We will not meddle with him till he
come, for his presence must be the whip of the
other.

FIRST LORD  In the meantime, what hear you of these
wars?

SECOND LORD  I hear there is an overture of peace.

FIRST LORD  Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded.

SECOND LORD  What will Count Rossillion do then?
Will he travel higher or return again into France?

FIRST LORD  I perceive by this demand you are not altogether
of his counsel.

SECOND LORD  Let it be forbid, sir! So should I be a
great deal of his act.

FIRST LORD  Sir, his wife some two months since fled
from his house. Her pretense is a pilgrimage to
Saint Jaques le Grand, which holy undertaking
with most austere sanctimony she accomplished.
And, there residing, the tenderness of her nature
became as a prey to her grief; in fine, made a groan
of her last breath, and now she sings in heaven.

SECOND LORD  How is this justified?

FIRST LORD  The stronger part of it by her own letters,
which makes her story true even to the point of her
death. Her death itself, which could not be her
office to say is come, was faithfully confirmed by
the rector of the place.

SECOND LORD  Hath the Count all this intelligence?

FIRST LORD  Ay, and the particular confirmations, point
from point, to the full arming of the verity.

SECOND LORD  I am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of
this.

FIRST LORD  How mightily sometimes we make us
comforts of our losses.

SECOND LORD  And how mightily some other times we
drown our gain in tears. The great dignity that his
valor hath here acquired for him shall at home be
encountered with a shame as ample.

FIRST LORD  The web of our life is of a mingled yarn,
good and ill together. Our virtues would be proud
if our faults whipped them not, and our crimes
would despair if they were not cherished by our
virtues.

[Enter a Servant.]

How now? Where's your master?

SERVANT  He met the Duke in the street, sir, of whom
he hath taken a solemn leave. His Lordship will
next morning for France. The Duke hath offered
him letters of commendations to the King.

SECOND LORD  They shall be no more than needful
there, if they were more than they can commend.
They cannot be too sweet for the King's tartness.

[Enter Bertram Count Rossillion.]

Here's his Lordship now.--How now, my lord? Is 't
not after midnight?

BERTRAM  I have tonight dispatched sixteen businesses,
a month's length apiece. By an abstract of
success: I have congeed with the Duke, done my
adieu with his nearest, buried a wife, mourned for
her, writ to my lady mother I am returning, entertained
my convoy, and between these main parcels
of dispatch effected many nicer needs. The last
was the greatest, but that I have not ended yet.

SECOND LORD  If the business be of any difficulty, and
this morning your departure hence, it requires
haste of your Lordship.

BERTRAM  I mean the business is not ended as fearing
to hear of it hereafter. But shall we have this dialogue
between the Fool and the Soldier? Come,
bring forth this counterfeit module; has deceived
me like a double-meaning prophesier.

SECOND LORD  Bring him forth. Has sat i' th' stocks all
night, poor gallant knave.	[Soldiers exit.]

BERTRAM  No matter. His heels have deserved it in
usurping his spurs so long. How does he carry
himself?

SECOND LORD  I have told your Lordship already: the
stocks carry him. But to answer you as you would
be understood: he weeps like a wench that had
shed her milk. He hath confessed himself to Morgan,
whom he supposes to be a friar, from the time
of his remembrance to this very instant disaster of
his setting i' th' stocks. And what think you he hath
confessed?

BERTRAM  Nothing of me, has he?

SECOND LORD  His confession is taken, and it shall be
read to his face. If your Lordship be in 't, as I
believe you are, you must have the patience to
hear it.

[Enter Parolles, blindfolded, with his Interpreter,
the First Soldier.]


BERTRAM  A plague upon him! Muffled! He can say
nothing of me.

FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  Hush, hush. Hoodman
comes.--Portotartarossa.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  He calls for the tortures.
What will you say without 'em?

PAROLLES  I will confess what I know without constraint.
If you pinch me like a pasty, I can say no
more.

FIRST SOLDIER  Bosko Chimurcho.

FIRST LORD  Boblibindo chicurmurco.

FIRST SOLDIER  You are a merciful general.--Our general
bids you answer to what I shall ask you out of a
note.

PAROLLES  And truly, as I hope to live.

FIRST SOLDIER, [as if reading a note]  First, demand of
him how many horse the Duke is strong.--What say
you to that?

PAROLLES  Five or six thousand, but very weak and
unserviceable. The troops are all scattered, and the
commanders very poor rogues, upon my reputation
and credit, and as I hope to live.

FIRST SOLDIER  Shall I set down your answer so?

PAROLLES  Do. I'll take the Sacrament on 't, how and
which way you will.

BERTRAM, [aside]  All's one to him. What a past-saving
slave is this!

FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  You're deceived, my
lord. This is Monsieur Parolles, the gallant
militarist--that was his own phrase--that had the
whole theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and
the practice in the chape of his dagger.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  I will never trust a man again for
keeping his sword clean, nor believe he can have
everything in him by wearing his apparel neatly.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  Well, that's set down.

PAROLLES  "Five or six thousand horse," I said--I will
say true--"or thereabouts" set down, for I'll speak
truth.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  He's very near the truth in this.

BERTRAM, [aside]  But I con him no thanks for 't, in the
nature he delivers it.

PAROLLES  "Poor rogues," I pray you say.

FIRST SOLDIER  Well, that's set down.

PAROLLES  I humbly thank you, sir. A truth's a truth.
The rogues are marvelous poor.

FIRST SOLDIER, [as if reading a note]  Demand of him of
what strength they are o' foot.--What say you to
that?

PAROLLES  By my troth, sir, if I were to live but this
present hour, I will tell true. Let me see: Spurio a
hundred and fifty, Sebastian so many, Corambus
so many, Jaques so many; Guiltian, Cosmo,
Lodowick and Gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine
own company, Chitopher, Vaumond, Bentii, two
hundred fifty each; so that the muster-file, rotten
and sound, upon my life amounts not to fifteen
thousand poll, half of the which dare not shake the
snow from off their cassocks lest they shake themselves
to pieces.

BERTRAM, [aside]  What shall be done to him?

FIRST LORD, [aside]  Nothing but let him have thanks.
[(Aside to First Soldier.)] Demand of him my condition
and what credit I have with the Duke.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  Well, that's set down. [Pretending
to read:] You shall demand of him whether
one Captain Dumaine be i' th' camp, a Frenchman;
what his reputation is with the Duke, what his valor,
honesty, and expertness in wars; or whether he
thinks it were not possible with well-weighing sums
of gold to corrupt him to a revolt.--What say you to
this? What do you know of it?

PAROLLES  I beseech you let me answer to the particular
of the inter'gatories. Demand them singly.

FIRST SOLDIER  Do you know this Captain Dumaine?

PAROLLES  I know him. He was a botcher's prentice in
Paris, from whence he was whipped for getting the
shrieve's fool with child, a dumb innocent that
could not say him nay.

BERTRAM, [aside to First Lord]  Nay, by your leave, hold
your hands, though I know his brains are forfeit to
the next tile that falls.

FIRST SOLDIER  Well, is this captain in the Duke of
Florence's camp?

PAROLLES  Upon my knowledge he is, and lousy.

FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  Nay, look not so upon
me. We shall hear of your Lordship anon.

FIRST SOLDIER  What is his reputation with the Duke?

PAROLLES  The Duke knows him for no other but a
poor officer of mine, and writ to me this other day
to turn him out o' th' band. I think I have his letter
in my pocket.

FIRST SOLDIER  Marry, we'll search.
[They search Parolles' pockets.]

PAROLLES  In good sadness, I do not know. Either it is
there, or it is upon a file with the Duke's other letters
in my tent.

FIRST SOLDIER  Here 'tis; here's a paper. Shall I read it to
you?

PAROLLES  I do not know if it be it or no.

BERTRAM, [aside]  Our interpreter does it well.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  Excellently.

FIRST SOLDIER [reads]  Dian, the Count's a fool and full
of gold--

PAROLLES  That is not the Duke's letter, sir. That is an
advertisement to a proper maid in Florence, one
Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count
Rossillion, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very
ruttish. I pray you, sir, put it up again.

FIRST SOLDIER  Nay, I'll read it first, by your favor.

PAROLLES  My meaning in 't, I protest, was very honest
in the behalf of the maid, for I knew the young
count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is
a whale to virginity and devours up all the fry it
finds.

BERTRAM, [aside]  Damnable both-sides rogue!

FIRST SOLDIER [reads]
	When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and
take it.
	   After he scores, he never pays the score.
	Half won is match well made. Match, and well
make it.
	   He ne'er pays after-debts. Take it before.
	And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this:
	Men are to mell with; boys are not to kiss.
	For count of this: the Count's a fool, I know it,
	Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
	Thine, as he vowed to thee in thine ear,
Parolles.

BERTRAM, [aside]  He shall be whipped through the
army with this rhyme in 's forehead.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  This is your devoted friend, sir,
the manifold linguist and the armipotent soldier.

BERTRAM, [aside]  I could endure anything before but a
cat, and now he's a cat to me.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  I perceive, sir, by our
general's looks we shall be fain to hang you.

PAROLLES  My life, sir, in any case! Not that I am afraid
to die, but that, my offenses being many, I would
repent out the remainder of nature. Let me live,
sir, in a dungeon, i' th' stocks, or anywhere, so I
may live.

FIRST SOLDIER  We'll see what may be done, so you confess
freely. Therefore once more to this Captain
Dumaine: you have answered to his reputation
with the Duke, and to his valor. What is his
honesty?

PAROLLES  He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister. For
rapes and ravishments, he parallels Nessus. He
professes not keeping of oaths. In breaking 'em he
is stronger than Hercules. He will lie, sir, with such
volubility that you would think truth were a fool.
Drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be
swine-drunk, and in his sleep he does little harm,
save to his bedclothes about him; but they know
his conditions and lay him in straw. I have but
little more to say, sir, of his honesty; he has everything
that an honest man should not have; what an
honest man should have, he has nothing.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  I begin to love him for this.

BERTRAM, [aside]  For this description of thine honesty?
A pox upon him! For me, he's more and more
a cat.

FIRST SOLDIER  What say you to his expertness in war?

PAROLLES  Faith, sir, has led the drum before the English
tragedians. To belie him I will not, and more
of his soldiership I know not, except in that country
he had the honor to be the officer at a place
there called Mile End, to instruct for the doubling
of files. I would do the man what honor I can, but
of this I am not certain.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  He hath out-villained villainy so
far that the rarity redeems him.

BERTRAM, [aside]  A pox on him! He's a cat still.

FIRST SOLDIER  His qualities being at this poor price,
I need not to ask you if gold will corrupt him to
revolt.

PAROLLES  Sir, for a cardecu he will sell the fee-simple
of his salvation, the inheritance of it, and cut th'
entail from all remainders, and a perpetual succession
for it perpetually.

FIRST SOLDIER  What's his brother, the other Captain
Dumaine?

SECOND LORD, [aside]  Why does he ask him of me?

FIRST SOLDIER  What's he?

PAROLLES  E'en a crow o' th' same nest: not altogether
so great as the first in goodness, but greater a great
deal in evil. He excels his brother for a coward, yet
his brother is reputed one of the best that is. In a
retreat he outruns any lackey. Marry, in coming on
he has the cramp.

FIRST SOLDIER  If your life be saved, will you undertake
to betray the Florentine?

PAROLLES  Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count
Rossillion.

FIRST SOLDIER  I'll whisper with the General and know
his pleasure.

PAROLLES, [aside]  I'll no more drumming. A plague of
all drums! Only to seem to deserve well, and to
beguile the supposition of that lascivious young
boy the Count, have I run into this danger. Yet who
would have suspected an ambush where I was
taken?

FIRST SOLDIER  There is no remedy, sir, but you must
die. The General says you that have so traitorously
discovered the secrets of your army and made
such pestiferous reports of men very nobly held
can serve the world for no honest use. Therefore
you must die.--Come, headsman, off with his
head.

PAROLLES  O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my
death!

FIRST SOLDIER  That shall you, and take your leave of
all your friends. [He removes the blindfold.] So,
look about you. Know you any here?

BERTRAM  Good morrow, noble captain.

SECOND LORD  God bless you, Captain Parolles.

FIRST LORD  God save you, noble captain.

SECOND LORD  Captain, what greeting will you to my
Lord Lafew? I am for France.

FIRST LORD  Good captain, will you give me a copy of
the sonnet you writ to Diana in behalf of the Count
Rossillion? An I were not a very coward, I'd compel
it of you. But fare you well.
[Bertram and Lords exit.]

FIRST SOLDIER  You are undone, captain--all but your
scarf; that has a knot on 't yet.

PAROLLES  Who cannot be crushed with a plot?

FIRST SOLDIER  If you could find out a country where
but women were that had received so much
shame, you might begin an impudent nation. Fare
you well, sir. I am for France too. We shall speak of
you there.	[He exits.]

PAROLLES
Yet am I thankful. If my heart were great,
'Twould burst at this. Captain I'll be no more,
But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft
As captain shall. Simply the thing I am
Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart,
Let him fear this, for it will come to pass
That every braggart shall be found an ass.
Rust, sword; cool, blushes; and Parolles live
Safest in shame. Being fooled, by fool'ry thrive.
There's place and means for every man alive.
I'll after them.	[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Helen, Widow, and Diana.]


HELEN
That you may well perceive I have not wronged you,
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety, 'fore whose throne 'tis needful,
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
Time was, I did him a desired office
Dear almost as his life, which gratitude
Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth
And answer thanks. I duly am informed
His Grace is at Marseilles, to which place
We have convenient convoy. You must know
I am supposed dead. The army breaking,
My husband hies him home, where, heaven aiding
And by the leave of my good lord the King,
We'll be before our welcome.

WIDOW  Gentle madam,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome.

HELEN  Nor you, mistress,
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labor
To recompense your love. Doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motive
And helper to a husband. But O, strange men,
That can such sweet use make of what they hate
When saucy trusting of the cozened thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night! So lust doth play
With what it loathes for that which is away.
But more of this hereafter.--You, Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Something in my behalf.

DIANA  Let death and honesty
Go with your impositions, I am yours
Upon your will to suffer.

HELEN  Yet, I pray you--
But with the word "The time will bring on summer,"
When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns
And be as sweet as sharp. We must away.
Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us.
All's well that ends well. Still the fine's the crown.
Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Fool, Countess, and Lafew.]


LAFEW  No, no, no, your son was misled with a
snipped-taffeta fellow there, whose villainous saffron
would have made all the unbaked and doughy
youth of a nation in his color. Your daughter-in-law
had been alive at this hour, and your son here
at home, more advanced by the King than by that
red-tailed humble-bee I speak of.

COUNTESS  I would I had not known him. It was the
death of the most virtuous gentlewoman that ever
nature had praise for creating. If she had partaken
of my flesh and cost me the dearest groans of a
mother, I could not have owed her a more rooted
love.

LAFEW  'Twas a good lady, 'twas a good lady. We may
pick a thousand salads ere we light on such another
herb.

FOOL  Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the
salad, or rather the herb of grace.

LAFEW  They are not herbs, you knave. They are
nose-herbs.

FOOL  I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir. I have not
much skill in grass.

LAFEW  Whether dost thou profess thyself, a knave or a
fool?

FOOL  A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a
man's.

LAFEW  Your distinction?

FOOL  I would cozen the man of his wife and do his
service.

LAFEW  So you were a knave at his service indeed.

FOOL  And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do
her service.

LAFEW  I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave
and fool.

FOOL  At your service.

LAFEW  No, no, no.

FOOL  Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as
great a prince as you are.

LAFEW  Who's that, a Frenchman?

FOOL  Faith, sir, he has an English name, but his
phys'nomy is more hotter in France than there.

LAFEW  What prince is that?

FOOL  The black prince, sir, alias the prince of darkness,
alias the devil.

LAFEW, [giving him money]  Hold thee, there's my
purse. I give thee not this to suggest thee from thy
master thou talk'st of. Serve him still.

FOOL  I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a
great fire, and the master I speak of ever keeps a
good fire. But sure he is the prince of the world; let
his Nobility remain in 's court. I am for the house
with the narrow gate, which I take to be too little
for pomp to enter. Some that humble themselves
may, but the many will be too chill and tender, and
they'll be for the flow'ry way that leads to the
broad gate and the great fire.

LAFEW  Go thy ways. I begin to be aweary of thee. And
I tell thee so before because I would not fall out
with thee. Go thy ways. Let my horses be well
looked to, without any tricks.

FOOL  If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be
jades' tricks, which are their own right by the law
of nature.	[He exits.]

LAFEW  A shrewd knave and an unhappy.

COUNTESS  So he is. My lord that's gone made himself
much sport out of him. By his authority he
remains here, which he thinks is a patent for his
sauciness, and indeed he has no pace, but runs
where he will.

LAFEW  I like him well. 'Tis not amiss. And I was about
to tell you, since I heard of the good lady's death
and that my lord your son was upon his return
home, I moved the King my master to speak in the
behalf of my daughter, which in the minority of
them both his Majesty out of a self-gracious
remembrance did first propose. His Highness hath
promised me to do it, and to stop up the displeasure
he hath conceived against your son there is
no fitter matter. How does your Ladyship like it?

COUNTESS  With very much content, my lord, and I
wish it happily effected.

LAFEW  His Highness comes post from Marseilles, of
as able body as when he numbered thirty. He will
be here tomorrow, or I am deceived by him that in
such intelligence hath seldom failed.

COUNTESS  It rejoices me that, I hope, I shall see him
ere I die. I have letters that my son will be here
tonight. I shall beseech your Lordship to remain
with me till they meet together.

LAFEW  Madam, I was thinking with what manners I
might safely be admitted.

COUNTESS  You need but plead your honorable
privilege.

LAFEW  Lady, of that I have made a bold charter. But I
thank my God it holds yet.

[Enter Fool.]


FOOL  O madam, yonder's my lord your son with a
patch of velvet on 's face. Whether there be a scar
under 't or no, the velvet knows, but 'tis a goodly
patch of velvet. His left cheek is a cheek of two pile
and a half, but his right cheek is worn bare.

LAFEW  A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good liv'ry
of honor. So belike is that.

FOOL  But it is your carbonadoed face.

LAFEW  Let us go see your son, I pray you. I long to talk
with the young noble soldier.

FOOL  'Faith, there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine
hats, and most courteous feathers which bow the
head and nod at every man.
[They exit.]
