ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Flourish cornets. Enter the King, attended, with divers
young Lords, taking leave for the Florentine war;
Bertram Count Rossillion, and Parolles.]


KING
Farewell, young lords. These warlike principles
Do not throw from you.--And you, my lords,
farewell.
Share the advice betwixt you. If both gain all,
The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received
And is enough for both.

FIRST LORD  'Tis our hope, sir,
After well-entered soldiers, to return
And find your Grace in health.

KING
No, no, it cannot be. And yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords.
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy Frenchmen. Let higher Italy--
Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last monarchy--see that you come
Not to woo honor but to wed it. When
The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud. I say farewell.

FIRST LORD
Health at your bidding serve your Majesty!

KING
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them.
They say our French lack language to deny
If they demand. Beware of being captives
Before you serve.

LORDS  Our hearts receive your warnings.

KING  Farewell.--Come hither to me.
[The King speaks to Attendants, while Bertram,
Parolles, and other Lords come forward.]

FIRST LORD, [to Bertram]
O my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!

PAROLLES
'Tis not his fault, the spark.

SECOND LORD  O, 'tis brave wars.

PAROLLES
Most admirable. I have seen those wars.

BERTRAM
I am commanded here and kept a coil
With "Too young," and "The next year," and "'Tis
too early."

PAROLLES
An thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely.

BERTRAM
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry
Till honor be bought up, and no sword worn
But one to dance with. By heaven, I'll steal away!

FIRST LORD
There's honor in the theft.

PAROLLES  Commit it, count.

SECOND LORD
I am your accessory. And so, farewell.

BERTRAM  I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured
body.

FIRST LORD  Farewell, captain.

SECOND LORD  Sweet Monsieur Parolles.

PAROLLES  Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin.
Good sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals.
You shall find in the regiment of the Spinii one
Captain Spurio with his cicatrice, an emblem of
war, here on his sinister cheek. It was this very
sword entrenched it. Say to him I live, and observe
his reports for me.

FIRST LORD  We shall, noble captain.

PAROLLES  Mars dote on you for his novices.
[Lords exit.]
[To Bertram.] What will you do?

BERTRAM  Stay the King.

PAROLLES  Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble
lords. You have restrained yourself within the list
of too cold an adieu. Be more expressive to them,
for they wear themselves in the cap of the time;
there do muster true gait; eat, speak, and move
under the influence of the most received star, and,
though the devil lead the measure, such are to be
followed. After them, and take a more dilated
farewell.

BERTRAM  And I will do so.

PAROLLES  Worthy fellows, and like to prove most
sinewy swordmen.	[Bertram and Parolles exit.]

[Enter Lafew, to the King.]


LAFEW, [kneeling]
Pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.

KING  I'll fee thee to stand up.

LAFEW, [standing]
Then here's a man stands that has brought his
pardon.
I would you had kneeled, my lord, to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.

KING
I would I had, so I had broke thy pate
And asked thee mercy for 't.

LAFEW  Good faith, across.
But, my good lord, 'tis thus: will you be cured
Of your infirmity?

KING  No.

LAFEW  O, will you eat
No grapes, my royal fox? Yes, but you will
My noble grapes, an if my royal fox
Could reach them. I have seen a medicine
That's able to breathe life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
With sprightly fire and motion, whose simple touch
Is powerful to araise King Pippen, nay,
To give great Charlemagne a pen in 's hand
And write to her a love line.

KING  What "her" is this?

LAFEW
Why, Doctor She. My lord, there's one arrived,
If you will see her. Now, by my faith and honor,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one that in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom, and constancy hath amazed me more
Than I dare blame my weakness. Will you see her--
For that is her demand--and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.

KING  Now, good Lafew,
Bring in the admiration, that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wond'ring how thou took'st it.

LAFEW  Nay, I'll fit you,
And not be all day neither.
[He goes to bring in Helen.]

KING
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.

[Enter Helen.]


LAFEW, [to Helen]  Nay, come your ways.

KING  This haste hath wings indeed.

LAFEW  Nay, come your ways.
This is his Majesty. Say your mind to him.
A traitor you do look like, but such traitors
His Majesty seldom fears. I am Cressid's uncle
That dare leave two together. Fare you well.
[He exits.]

KING
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?

HELEN  Ay, my good lord,
Gerard de Narbon was my father,
In what he did profess well found.

KING  I knew him.

HELEN
The rather will I spare my praises towards him.
Knowing him is enough. On 's bed of death
Many receipts he gave me, chiefly one
Which, as the dearest issue of his practice,
And of his old experience th' only darling,
He bade me store up as a triple eye,
Safer than mine own two, more dear. I have so,
And hearing your high Majesty is touched
With that malignant cause wherein the honor
Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
I come to tender it and my appliance
With all bound humbleness.

KING  We thank you, maiden,
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned doctors leave us and
The congregated college have concluded
That laboring art can never ransom nature
From her inaidible estate. I say we must not
So stain our judgment or corrupt our hope
To prostitute our past-cure malady
To empirics, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit to esteem
A senseless help when help past sense we deem.

HELEN
My duty, then, shall pay me for my pains.
I will no more enforce mine office on you,
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
A modest one to bear me back again.

KING
I cannot give thee less, to be called grateful.
Thou thought'st to help me, and such thanks I give
As one near death to those that wish him live.
But what at full I know, thou know'st no part,
I knowing all my peril, thou no art.

HELEN
What I can do can do no hurt to try
Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy.
He that of greatest works is finisher
Oft does them by the weakest minister.
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown
When judges have been babes. Great floods have flown
From simple sources, and great seas have dried
When miracles have by the great'st been denied.
Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
Where most it promises, and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest and despair most shifts.

KING
I must not hear thee. Fare thee well, kind maid.
Thy pains, not used, must by thyself be paid.
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.

HELEN
Inspired merit so by breath is barred.
It is not so with Him that all things knows
As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows;
But most it is presumption in us when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavors give consent.
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an impostor that proclaim
Myself against the level of mine aim,
But know I think and think I know most sure
My art is not past power nor you past cure.

KING
Art thou so confident? Within what space
Hop'st thou my cure?

HELEN  The greatest grace lending grace,
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring;
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus hath quenched her sleepy lamp;
Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass
Hath told the thievish minutes, how they pass,
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free, and sickness freely die.

KING
Upon thy certainty and confidence
What dar'st thou venture?

HELEN  Tax of impudence,
A strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame;
Traduced by odious ballads, my maiden's name
Seared otherwise; nay, worse of worst, extended
With vilest torture let my life be ended.

KING
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound within an organ weak,
And what impossibility would slay
In common sense, sense saves another way.
Thy life is dear, for all that life can rate
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate:
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime can happy call.
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
Skill infinite or monstrous desperate.
Sweet practicer, thy physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.

HELEN
If I break time or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deserved. Not helping, death's my fee.
But if I help, what do you promise me?

KING
Make thy demand.

HELEN  But will you make it even?

KING
Ay, by my scepter and my hopes of heaven.

HELEN
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command.
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state;
But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.

KING
Here is my hand. The premises observed,
Thy will by my performance shall be served.
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely.
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know could not be more to trust:
From whence thou cam'st, how tended on; but rest
Unquestioned welcome and undoubted blessed.--
Give me some help here, ho!--If thou proceed
As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.
[Flourish. They exit, the King assisted.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Countess and Fool.]


COUNTESS  Come on, sir. I shall now put you to the
height of your breeding.

FOOL  I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught. I
know my business is but to the court.

COUNTESS  "To the court"? Why, what place make you
special when you put off that with such contempt?
"But to the court"?

FOOL  Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners,
he may easily put it off at court. He that cannot
make a leg, put off 's cap, kiss his hand, and
say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap;
and indeed such a fellow, to say precisely, were
not for the court. But, for me, I have an answer
will serve all men.

COUNTESS  Marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all
questions.

FOOL  It is like a barber's chair that fits all buttocks:
the pin-buttock, the quatch-buttock, the brawn-buttock,
or any buttock.

COUNTESS  Will your answer serve fit to all questions?

FOOL  As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney,
as your French crown for your taffety punk, as
Tib's rush for Tom's forefinger, as a pancake for
Shrove Tuesday, a morris for May Day, as the nail
to his hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding
quean to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the
friar's mouth, nay, as the pudding to his skin.

COUNTESS  Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness
for all questions?

FOOL  From below your duke to beneath your constable,
it will fit any question.

COUNTESS  It must be an answer of most monstrous
size that must fit all demands.

FOOL  But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned
should speak truth of it. Here it is, and all that
belongs to 't. Ask me if I am a courtier; it shall do
you no harm to learn.

COUNTESS  To be young again, if we could! I will be a
fool in question, hoping to be the wiser by your
answer. I pray you, sir, are you a courtier?

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--There's a simple putting off. More,
more, a hundred of them.

COUNTESS  Sir, I am a poor friend of yours that loves
you.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Thick, thick. Spare not me.

COUNTESS  I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely
meat.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Nay, put me to 't, I warrant you.

COUNTESS  You were lately whipped, sir, as I think.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Spare not me.

COUNTESS  Do you cry "O Lord, sir!" at your whipping,
and "spare not me"? Indeed your "O Lord, sir!" is
very sequent to your whipping. You would answer
very well to a whipping if you were but bound to 't.

FOOL  I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my "O Lord,
sir!" I see things may serve long but not serve ever.

COUNTESS  I play the noble huswife with the time to
entertain it so merrily with a fool.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Why, there 't serves well again.

COUNTESS, [giving him a paper]
An end, sir. To your business. Give Helen this,
And urge her to a present answer back.
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son.
This is not much.

FOOL  Not much commendation to them?

COUNTESS
Not much employment for you. You understand me.

FOOL  Most fruitfully. I am there before my legs.

COUNTESS  Haste you again.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Count Bertram, Lafew, and Parolles.]


LAFEW  They say miracles are past, and we have our
philosophical persons to make modern and familiar
things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it
that we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves
into seeming knowledge when we should
submit ourselves to an unknown fear.

PAROLLES  Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that
hath shot out in our latter times.

BERTRAM  And so 'tis.

LAFEW  To be relinquished of the artists--

PAROLLES  So I say, both of Galen and Paracelsus.

LAFEW  Of all the learned and authentic fellows--

PAROLLES  Right, so I say.

LAFEW  That gave him out incurable--

PAROLLES  Why, there 'tis. So say I too.

LAFEW  Not to be helped.

PAROLLES  Right, as 'twere a man assured of a--

LAFEW  Uncertain life and sure death.

PAROLLES  Just. You say well. So would I have said.

LAFEW  I may truly say it is a novelty to the world.

PAROLLES  It is indeed. If you will have it in showing,
you shall read it in what-do-you-call there.
[He points to a paper in Lafew's hand.]

LAFEW [reads]  A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly
actor.

PAROLLES  That's it. I would have said the very same.

LAFEW  Why, your dolphin is not lustier. 'Fore me, I
speak in respect--

PAROLLES  Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange; that is the
brief and the tedious of it; and he's of a most facinorous
spirit that will not acknowledge it to be
the--

LAFEW  Very hand of heaven.

PAROLLES  Ay, so I say.

LAFEW  In a most weak--

PAROLLES  And debile minister. Great power, great
transcendence, which should indeed give us a further
use to be made than alone the recov'ry of the
King, as to be--

LAFEW  Generally thankful.

[Enter King, Helen, and Attendants.]


PAROLLES  I would have said it. You say well. Here
comes the King.

LAFEW  Lustig, as the Dutchman says. I'll like a maid
the better whilst I have a tooth in my head. Why,
he's able to lead her a coranto.

PAROLLES  Mort du vinaigre! Is not this Helen?

LAFEW  'Fore God, I think so.

KING
Go, call before me all the lords in court.
[An Attendant exits.]
Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side,
And with this healthful hand, whose banished sense
Thou hast repealed, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Which but attends thy naming.

[Enter three or four Court Lords.]

Fair maid, send forth thine eye. This youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
I have to use. Thy frank election make.
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.

HELEN
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
Fall when Love please! Marry, to each but one.

LAFEW, [aside]
I'd give bay Curtal and his furniture
My mouth no more were broken than these boys'
And writ as little beard.

KING  Peruse them well.
Not one of those but had a noble father.

HELEN  Gentlemen,
Heaven hath through me restored the King to health.

ALL
We understand it and thank heaven for you.

HELEN
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest
That I protest I simply am a maid.--
Please it your Majesty, I have done already.
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me:
"We blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be
refused,
Let the white death sit on thy cheek forever;
We'll ne'er come there again."

KING  Make choice and see.
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.

HELEN
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
Do my sighs stream.	[She addresses her to a Lord.]
Sir, will you hear my suit?

FIRST COURT LORD
And grant it.

HELEN  Thanks, sir. All the
rest is mute.

LAFEW, [aside]  I had rather be in this choice than
throw ambs-ace for my life.

HELEN, [to another Lord]
The honor, sir, that flames in your fair eyes
Before I speak too threat'ningly replies.
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so wishes, and her humble love.

SECOND COURT LORD
No better, if you please.

HELEN  My wish receive,
Which great Love grant, and so I take my leave.

LAFEW, [aside]  Do all they deny her? An they were sons
of mine, I'd have them whipped, or I would send
them to th' Turk to make eunuchs of.

HELEN, [to another Lord]
Be not afraid that I your hand should take.
I'll never do you wrong, for your own sake.
Blessing upon your vows, and in your bed
Find fairer fortune if you ever wed.

LAFEW, [aside]  These boys are boys of ice; they'll none
have her. Sure they are bastards to the English;
the French ne'er got 'em.

HELEN, [to another Lord]
You are too young, too happy, and too good
To make yourself a son out of my blood.

FOURTH COURT LORD  Fair one, I think not so.

LAFEW, [aside]  There's one grape yet. I am sure thy
father drunk wine. But if thou be'st not an ass, I
am a youth of fourteen; I have known thee already.

HELEN, [to Bertram]
I dare not say I take you, but I give
Me and my service ever whilst I live
Into your guiding power.--This is the man.

KING
Why then, young Bertram, take her. She's thy wife.

BERTRAM
My wife, my liege? I shall beseech your Highness
In such a business give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.

KING  Know'st thou not,
Bertram,
What she has done for me?

BERTRAM  Yes, my good lord,
But never hope to know why I should marry her.

KING
Thou know'st she has raised me from my sickly bed.

BERTRAM
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well;
She had her breeding at my father's charge.
A poor physician's daughter my wife? Disdain
Rather corrupt me ever!

KING
'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which
I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods,
Of color, weight, and heat, poured all together,
Would quite confound distinction, yet stands off
In differences so mighty. If she be
All that is virtuous, save what thou dislik'st--
"A poor physician's daughter"--thou dislik'st
Of virtue for the name. But do not so.
From lowest place whence virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by th' doer's deed.
Where great additions swell 's, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honor. Good alone
Is good, without a name; vileness is so;
The property by what it is should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair;
In these to nature she's immediate heir,
And these breed honor. That is honor's scorn
Which challenges itself as honor's born
And is not like the sire. Honors thrive
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our foregoers. The mere word's a slave
Debauched on every tomb, on every grave
A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb
Where dust and damned oblivion is the tomb
Of honored bones indeed. What should be said?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
I can create the rest. Virtue and she
Is her own dower, honor and wealth from me.

BERTRAM
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do 't.

KING
Thou wrong'st thyself if thou shouldst strive to
choose.

HELEN
That you are well restored, my lord, I'm glad.
Let the rest go.

KING
My honor's at the stake, which to defeat
I must produce my power.--Here, take her hand,
Proud, scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love and her desert; that canst not dream
We, poising us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know
It is in us to plant thine honor where
We please to have it grow. Check thy contempt;
Obey our will, which travails in thy good.
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims,
Or I will throw thee from my care forever
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance, both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee in the name of justice
Without all terms of pity. Speak. Thine answer.

BERTRAM
Pardon, my gracious lord, for I submit
My fancy to your eyes. When I consider
What great creation and what dole of honor
Flies where you bid it, I find that she which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base is now
The praised of the King, who, so ennobled,
Is as 'twere born so.

KING  Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine, to whom I promise
A counterpoise, if not to thy estate,
A balance more replete.

BERTRAM  I take her hand.

KING
Good fortune and the favor of the King
Smile upon this contract, whose ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief
And be performed tonight. The solemn feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou lov'st her
Thy love's to me religious; else, does err.
[They exit. Parolles and Lafew stay behind,
commenting of this wedding.]

LAFEW  Do you hear, monsieur? A word with you.

PAROLLES  Your pleasure, sir.

LAFEW  Your lord and master did well to make his
recantation.

PAROLLES  "Recantation"? My "lord"? My "master"?

LAFEW  Ay. Is it not a language I speak?

PAROLLES  A most harsh one, and not to be understood
without bloody succeeding. My "master"?

LAFEW  Are you companion to the Count Rossillion?

PAROLLES  To any count, to all counts, to what is man.

LAFEW  To what is count's man. Count's master is of
another style.

PAROLLES  You are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are
too old.

LAFEW  I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man, to which
title age cannot bring thee.

PAROLLES  What I dare too well do, I dare not do.

LAFEW  I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a
pretty wise fellow; thou didst make tolerable vent
of thy travel; it might pass. Yet the scarves and the
bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me
from believing thee a vessel of too great a burden.
I have now found thee. When I lose thee again, I
care not. Yet art thou good for nothing but taking
up, and that thou 'rt scarce worth.

PAROLLES  Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity
upon thee--

LAFEW  Do not plunge thyself too far in anger lest thou
hasten thy trial, which if--Lord have mercy on
thee for a hen! So, my good window of lattice, fare
thee well; thy casement I need not open, for I look
through thee. Give me thy hand.

PAROLLES  My lord, you give me most egregious
indignity.

LAFEW  Ay, with all my heart, and thou art worthy of it.

PAROLLES  I have not, my lord, deserved it.

LAFEW  Yes, good faith, ev'ry dram of it, and I will not
bate thee a scruple.

PAROLLES  Well, I shall be wiser.

LAFEW  Ev'n as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to
pull at a smack o' th' contrary. If ever thou be'st
bound in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt find
what it is to be proud of thy bondage. I have a
desire to hold my acquaintance with thee, or
rather my knowledge, that I may say in the default
"He is a man I know."

PAROLLES  My lord, you do me most insupportable
vexation.

LAFEW  I would it were hell pains for thy sake, and my
poor doing eternal; for doing I am past, as I will by
thee in what motion age will give me leave.
[He exits.]

PAROLLES  Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace
off me. Scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must
be patient; there is no fettering of authority. I'll
beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with any
convenience, an he were double and double a lord.
I'll have no more pity of his age than I would have
of--I'll beat him, an if I could but meet him again.

[Enter Lafew.]


LAFEW  Sirrah, your lord and master's married. There's
news for you: you have a new mistress.

PAROLLES  I most unfeignedly beseech your Lordship
to make some reservation of your wrongs. He is
my good lord; whom I serve above is my master.

LAFEW  Who? God?

PAROLLES  Ay, sir.

LAFEW  The devil it is that's thy master. Why dost thou
garter up thy arms o' this fashion? Dost make hose
of thy sleeves? Do other servants so? Thou wert
best set thy lower part where thy nose stands. By
mine honor, if I were but two hours younger, I'd
beat thee. Methink'st thou art a general offense,
and every man should beat thee. I think thou wast
created for men to breathe themselves upon thee.

PAROLLES  This is hard and undeserved measure, my
lord.

LAFEW  Go to, sir. You were beaten in Italy for picking a
kernel out of a pomegranate. You are a vagabond,
and no true traveler. You are more saucy with
lords and honorable personages than the commission
of your birth and virtue gives you heraldry.
You are not worth another word; else I'd call you
knave. I leave you.	[He exits.]

PAROLLES  Good, very good! It is so, then. Good, very
good. Let it be concealed awhile.

[Enter Bertram Count Rossillion.]


BERTRAM
Undone, and forfeited to cares forever!

PAROLLES  What's the matter, sweetheart?

BERTRAM
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
I will not bed her.

PAROLLES  What, what, sweetheart?

BERTRAM
O my Parolles, they have married me!
I'll to the Tuscan wars and never bed her.

PAROLLES  France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
the tread of a man's foot. To th' wars!

BERTRAM  There's letters from my mother. What th'
import is I know not yet.

PAROLLES  Ay, that would be known. To th' wars, my
boy, to th' wars!
He wears his honor in a box unseen
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions!
France is a stable, we that dwell in 't jades.
Therefore, to th' war!

BERTRAM
It shall be so. I'll send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her
And wherefore I am fled, write to the King
That which I durst not speak. His present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields
Where noble fellows strike. Wars is no strife
To the dark house and the detested wife.

PAROLLES
Will this capriccio hold in thee? Art sure?

BERTRAM
Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.
I'll send her straight away. Tomorrow
I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.

PAROLLES
Why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'Tis hard.
A young man married is a man that's marred.
Therefore away, and leave her bravely. Go.
The King has done you wrong, but hush, 'tis so.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Helen with a paper, and Fool.]


HELEN  My mother greets me kindly. Is she well?

FOOL  She is not well, but yet she has her health. She's
very merry, but yet she is not well. But, thanks be
given, she's very well and wants nothing i' th' world,
but yet she is not well.

HELEN  If she be very well, what does she ail that she's
not very well?

FOOL  Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.

HELEN  What two things?

FOOL  One, that she's not in heaven, whither God send
her quickly; the other, that she's in Earth, from
whence God send her quickly.

[Enter Parolles.]


PAROLLES  Bless you, my fortunate lady.

HELEN  I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine
own good fortunes.

PAROLLES  You had my prayers to lead them on, and to
keep them on have them still.--O my knave, how
does my old lady?

FOOL  So that you had her wrinkles and I her money, I
would she did as you say.

PAROLLES  Why, I say nothing.

FOOL  Marry, you are the wiser man, for many a man's
tongue shakes out his master's undoing. To say
nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to
have nothing is to be a great part of your title,
which is within a very little of nothing.

PAROLLES  Away. Thou 'rt a knave.

FOOL  You should have said, sir, "Before a knave,
thou 'rt a knave"; that's "Before me, thou 'rt a
knave." This had been truth, sir.

PAROLLES  Go to. Thou art a witty fool. I have found
thee.

FOOL  Did you find me in yourself, sir, or were you
taught to find me?

PAROLLES  ...

FOOL  The search, sir, was profitable, and much fool
may you find in you, even to the world's pleasure
and the increase of laughter.

PAROLLES  A good knave, i' faith, and well fed.
Madam, my lord will go away tonight;
A very serious business calls on him.
The great prerogative and rite of love,
Which as your due time claims, he does acknowledge
But puts it off to a compelled restraint,
Whose want and whose delay is strewed with sweets,
Which they distill now in the curbed time
To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
And pleasure drown the brim.

HELEN  What's his will else?

PAROLLES
That you will take your instant leave o' th' King
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Strengthened with what apology you think
May make it probable need.

HELEN  What more commands he?

PAROLLES
That, having this obtained, you presently
Attend his further pleasure.

HELEN
In everything I wait upon his will.

PAROLLES  I shall report it so.	[Parolles exits.]

HELEN, [to Fool]  I pray you, come, sirrah.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Lafew and Bertram.]


LAFEW  But I hope your Lordship thinks not him a
soldier.

BERTRAM  Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.

LAFEW  You have it from his own deliverance.

BERTRAM  And by other warranted testimony.

LAFEW  Then my dial goes not true. I took this lark for
a bunting.

BERTRAM  I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in
knowledge and accordingly valiant.

LAFEW  I have then sinned against his experience and
transgressed against his valor, and my state that
way is dangerous since I cannot yet find in my
heart to repent. Here he comes. I pray you make us
friends. I will pursue the amity.

[Enter Parolles.]


PAROLLES, [to Bertram]  These things shall be done, sir.

LAFEW, [to Bertram]  Pray you, sir, who's his tailor?

PAROLLES  Sir?

LAFEW  O, I know him well. Ay, sir, he, sir, 's a good
workman, a very good tailor.

BERTRAM, [aside to Parolles]  Is she gone to the King?

PAROLLES  She is.

BERTRAM  Will she away tonight?

PAROLLES  As you'll have her.

BERTRAM
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
Given order for our horses, and tonight,
When I should take possession of the bride,
End ere I do begin.

LAFEW, [aside]  A good traveler is something at the latter
end of a dinner, but one that lies three thirds,
and uses a known truth to pass a thousand nothings
with, should be once heard and thrice beaten.--
God save you, captain.

BERTRAM, [to Parolles]  Is there any unkindness
between my lord and you, monsieur?

PAROLLES  I know not how I have deserved to run into
my lord's displeasure.

LAFEW  You have made shift to run into 't, boots and
spurs and all, like him that leapt into the custard;
and out of it you'll run again rather than suffer
question for your residence.

BERTRAM  It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.

LAFEW  And shall do so ever, though I took him at 's
prayers. Fare you well, my lord, and believe this of
me: there can be no kernel in this light nut. The
soul of this man is his clothes. Trust him not in
matter of heavy consequence. I have kept of them
tame and know their natures.--Farewell, monsieur.
I have spoken better of you than you have or
will to deserve at my hand, but we must do good
against evil.	[He exits.]

PAROLLES  An idle lord, I swear.

BERTRAM  I think not so.

PAROLLES  Why, do you not know him?

BERTRAM
Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass.

[Enter Helen.]

Here comes my clog.

HELEN
I have, sir, as I was commanded from you,
Spoke with the King and have procured his leave
For present parting. Only he desires
Some private speech with you.

BERTRAM  I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not color with the time, nor does
The ministration and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business; therefore am I found
So much unsettled. This drives me to entreat you
That presently you take your way for home,
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you;
For my respects are better than they seem,
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not.	[Giving her a paper.]
This to my mother.
'Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so
I leave you to your wisdom.

HELEN  Sir, I can nothing say
But that I am your most obedient servant--

BERTRAM
Come, come, no more of that.

HELEN  And ever shall
With true observance seek to eke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have failed
To equal my great fortune.

BERTRAM  Let that go.
My haste is very great. Farewell. Hie home.

HELEN
Pray, sir, your pardon.

BERTRAM  Well, what would you say?

HELEN
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe,
Nor dare I say 'tis mine--and yet it is--
But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
What law does vouch mine own.

BERTRAM  What would you have?

HELEN
Something, and scarce so much; nothing, indeed.
I would not tell you what I would, my lord. Faith,
yes:
Strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss.

BERTRAM
I pray you stay not, but in haste to horse.

HELEN
I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.--
Where are my other men?--Monsieur, farewell.
[She exits.]

BERTRAM
Go thou toward home, where I will never come
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.--
Away, and for our flight.

PAROLLES  Bravely, coraggio!
[They exit.]
