ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence, the two French
Lords, with a troop of Soldiers.]


DUKE
So that from point to point now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth
And more thirsts after.

FIRST LORD  Holy seems the quarrel
Upon your Grace's part, black and fearful
On the opposer.

DUKE
Therefore we marvel much our cousin France
Would in so just a business shut his bosom
Against our borrowing prayers.

SECOND LORD  Good my lord,
The reasons of our state I cannot yield
But like a common and an outward man
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion; therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
As often as I guessed.

DUKE  Be it his pleasure.

FIRST LORD
But I am sure the younger of our nation,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for physic.

DUKE  Welcome shall they be,
And all the honors that can fly from us
Shall on them settle. You know your places well.
When better fall, for your avails they fell.
Tomorrow to th' field.
[Flourish. They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Countess, with a paper, and Fool.]


COUNTESS  It hath happened all as I would have had it,
save that he comes not along with her.

FOOL  By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very
melancholy man.

COUNTESS  By what observance, I pray you?

FOOL  Why, he will look upon his boot and sing, mend
the ruff and sing, ask questions and sing, pick his
teeth and sing. I know a man that had this trick of
melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song.

COUNTESS  Let me see what he writes and when he
means to come.	[She opens the letter.]

FOOL  I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court. Our
old lings and our Isbels o' th' country are nothing
like your old ling and your Isbels o' th' court. The
brains of my Cupid's knocked out, and I begin to
love as an old man loves money, with no stomach.

COUNTESS  What have we here?

FOOL  E'en that you have there.	[He exits.]

COUNTESS [reads.]  I have sent you a daughter-in-law.
She hath recovered the King and undone me. I have
wedded her, not bedded her, and sworn to make the
"not" eternal. You shall hear I am run away. Know it
before the report come. If there be breadth enough in
the world, I will hold a long distance. My duty to
you.
	Your unfortunate son,
Bertram.
This is not well, rash and unbridled boy:
To fly the favors of so good a king,
To pluck his indignation on thy head
By the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
For the contempt of empire.

[Enter Fool.]


FOOL  O madam, yonder is heavy news within, between
two soldiers and my young lady.

COUNTESS  What is the matter?

FOOL  Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some
comfort. Your son will not be killed so soon as I
thought he would.

COUNTESS  Why should he be killed?

FOOL  So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he
does. The danger is in standing to 't; that's the loss
of men, though it be the getting of children. Here
they come will tell you more. For my part, I only
hear your son was run away.	[He exits.]

[Enter Helen, with a paper, and two Gentlemen.]


FIRST GENTLEMAN, [to Countess]  Save you, good
madam.

HELEN
Madam, my lord is gone, forever gone.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Do not say so.

COUNTESS
Think upon patience, pray you.--Gentlemen,
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief
That the first face of neither on the start
Can woman me unto 't. Where is my son, I pray you?

SECOND GENTLEMAN
Madam, he's gone to serve the Duke of Florence.
We met him thitherward, for thence we came,
And, after some dispatch in hand at court,
Thither we bend again.

HELEN
Look on his letter, madam; here's my passport.
[She reads.] When thou canst get the ring upon
my finger, which never shall come off, and show me
a child begotten of thy body that I am father to, then
call me husband. But in such a "then" I write a
"never."
This is a dreadful sentence.

COUNTESS
Brought you this letter, gentlemen?

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Ay, madam,
And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pains.

COUNTESS
I prithee, lady, have a better cheer.
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
Thou robb'st me of a moiety. He was my son,
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child.--Towards Florence is he?

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Ay, madam.

COUNTESS  And to be a soldier?

SECOND GENTLEMAN
Such is his noble purpose, and, believe 't,
The Duke will lay upon him all the honor
That good convenience claims.

COUNTESS  Return you thither?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.

HELEN [reads]
Till I have no wife I have nothing in France.
'Tis bitter.

COUNTESS  Find you that there?

HELEN  Ay, madam.

FIRST GENTLEMAN
'Tis but the boldness of his hand, haply,
Which his heart was not consenting to.

COUNTESS
Nothing in France until he have no wife!
There's nothing here that is too good for him
But only she, and she deserves a lord
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon
And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
A servant only, and a gentleman
Which I have sometime known.

COUNTESS  Parolles was it not?

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Ay, my good lady, he.

COUNTESS
A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.
My son corrupts a well-derived nature
With his inducement.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Indeed, good lady,
The fellow has a deal of that too much
Which holds him much to have.

COUNTESS  You're welcome,
gentlemen.
I will entreat you when you see my son
To tell him that his sword can never win
The honor that he loses. More I'll entreat you
Written to bear along.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  We serve you, madam,
In that and all your worthiest affairs.

COUNTESS
Not so, but as we change our courtesies.
Will you draw near?
[She exits with the Gentlemen.]

HELEN
"Till I have no wife I have nothing in France."
Nothing in France until he has no wife.
Thou shalt have none, Rossillion, none in France.
Then hast thou all again. Poor lord, is 't I
That chase thee from thy country and expose
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Of the none-sparing war? And is it I
That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim; move the still-'pearing air
That sings with piercing; do not touch my lord.
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there;
Whoever charges on his forward breast,
I am the caitiff that do hold him to 't;
And though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected. Better 'twere
I met the ravin lion when he roared
With sharp constraint of hunger; better 'twere
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No, come thou home, Rossillion,
Whence honor but of danger wins a scar,
As oft it loses all. I will be gone.
My being here it is that holds thee hence.
Shall I stay here to do 't? No, no, although
The air of paradise did fan the house
And angels officed all. I will be gone,
That pitiful rumor may report my flight
To consolate thine ear. Come, night; end, day;
For with the dark, poor thief, I'll steal away.
[She exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence, Bertram Count
Rossillion, Drum and Trumpets, Soldiers, Parolles.]


DUKE, [to Bertram]
The general of our horse thou art, and we,
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
Upon thy promising fortune.

BERTRAM  Sir, it is
A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
To th' extreme edge of hazard.

DUKE  Then go thou forth,
And Fortune play upon thy prosperous helm
As thy auspicious mistress.

BERTRAM  This very day,
Great Mars, I put myself into thy file.
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.
[All exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Countess and Steward, with a paper.]


COUNTESS
Alas! And would you take the letter of her?
Might you not know she would do as she has done
By sending me a letter? Read it again.

STEWARD [reads the letter]
	I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone.
	   Ambitious love hath so in me offended
	That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
	   With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
	Write, write, that from the bloody course of war
	   My dearest master, your dear son, may hie.
	Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far
	   His name with zealous fervor sanctify.
	His taken labors bid him me forgive;
	   I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth
	From courtly friends, with camping foes to live
	   Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth.
	He is too good and fair for death and me,
	Whom I myself embrace to set him free.

COUNTESS
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much
As letting her pass so. Had I spoke with her,
I could have well diverted her intents,
Which thus she hath prevented.

STEWARD  Pardon me, madam.
If I had given you this at overnight,
She might have been o'erta'en. And yet she writes
Pursuit would be but vain.

COUNTESS  What angel shall
Bless this unworthy husband? He cannot thrive
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rinaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife.
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth
That he does weigh too light. My greatest grief,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger.
When haply he shall hear that she is gone,
He will return; and hope I may that she,
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love. Which of them both
Is dearest to me, I have no skill in sense
To make distinction. Provide this messenger.
My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak.
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[A tucket afar off. Enter old Widow of Florence, her
daughter Diana, and Mariana, with other Citizens.]


WIDOW  Nay, come, for if they do approach the city, we
shall lose all the sight.

DIANA  They say the French count has done most honorable
service.

WIDOW  It is reported that he has taken their great'st
commander, and that with his own hand he slew
the Duke's brother. [A trumpet sounds.] We have
lost our labor. They are gone a contrary way. Hark,
you may know by their trumpets.

MARIANA  Come, let's return again and suffice ourselves
with the report of it.--Well, Diana, take heed of
this French earl. The honor of a maid is her name,
and no legacy is so rich as honesty.

WIDOW, [to Diana]  I have told my neighbor how you
have been solicited by a gentleman, his
companion.

MARIANA  I know that knave, hang him! One Parolles, a
filthy officer he is in those suggestions for the
young earl.--Beware of them, Diana. Their promises,
enticements, oaths, tokens, and all these
engines of lust are not the things they go under.
Many a maid hath been seduced by them; and
the misery is example that so terrible shows in the
wrack of maidenhood cannot for all that dissuade
succession, but that they are limed with the twigs
that threatens them. I hope I need not to advise
you further, but I hope your own grace will keep
you where you are, though there were no further
danger known but the modesty which is so lost.

DIANA  You shall not need to fear me.

WIDOW  I hope so.

[Enter Helen as a pilgrim.]

Look, here comes a pilgrim. I know she will lie at
my house; thither they send one another. I'll question
her.--God save you, pilgrim. Whither are
bound?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  To Saint Jaques le Grand.
Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?

WIDOW
At the Saint Francis here beside the port.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Is this the way?	[A march afar.]

WIDOW
Ay, marry, is 't.--Hark you, they come this way.--
If you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
But till the troops come by,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodged,
The rather for I think I know your hostess
As ample as myself.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Is it yourself?

WIDOW  If you shall please so, pilgrim.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]
I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.

WIDOW
You came I think from France?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  I did so.

WIDOW
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
That has done worthy service.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  His name, I pray you?

DIANA
The Count Rossillion. Know you such a one?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him.
His face I know not.

DIANA  Whatsome'er he is,
He's bravely taken here. He stole from France,
As 'tis reported, for the King had married him
Against his liking. Think you it is so?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]
Ay, surely, mere the truth. I know his lady.

DIANA
There is a gentleman that serves the Count
Reports but coarsely of her.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  What's his name?

DIANA
Monsieur Parolles.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  O, I believe with him.
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great count himself, she is too mean
To have her name repeated. All her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
I have not heard examined.

DIANA  Alas, poor lady,
'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife
Of a detesting lord.

WIDOW
I warrant, good creature, wheresoe'er she is,
Her heart weighs sadly. This young maid might do
her
A shrewd turn if she pleased.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  How do you mean?
Maybe the amorous count solicits her
In the unlawful purpose?

WIDOW  He does indeed,
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
Corrupt the tender honor of a maid,
But she is armed for him and keeps her guard
In honestest defense.

MARIANA
The gods forbid else!

[Drum and Colors. Enter Bertram Count Rossillion,
Parolles, and the whole Army.]


WIDOW  So, now they come.
That is Antonio, the Duke's eldest son;
That, Escalus.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Which is the Frenchman?

DIANA  He,
That with the plume. 'Tis a most gallant fellow.
I would he loved his wife. If he were honester,
He were much goodlier. Is 't not a handsome
gentleman?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  I like him well.

DIANA
'Tis pity he is not honest. Yond's that same knave
That leads him to these places. Were I his lady,
I would poison that vile rascal.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Which is he?

DIANA
That jackanapes with scarves. Why is he melancholy?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Perchance he's hurt i' th' battle.

PAROLLES  Lose our drum? Well.

MARIANA  He's shrewdly vexed at something. Look, he
has spied us.

WIDOW, [to Parolles]  Marry, hang you.

MARIANA, [to Parolles]  And your courtesy, for a
ring-carrier.
[Bertram, Parolles, and the army exit.]

WIDOW
The troop is passed. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
Where you shall host. Of enjoined penitents
There's four or five, to Great Saint Jaques bound,
Already at my house.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  I humbly thank you.
Please it this matron and this gentle maid
To eat with us tonight, the charge and thanking
Shall be for me. And to requite you further,
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin
Worthy the note.

BOTH  We'll take your offer kindly.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Bertram Count Rossillion and the French
Lords, as at first.]


FIRST LORD  Nay, good my lord, put him to 't. Let him
have his way.

SECOND LORD  If your Lordship find him not a hilding,
hold me no more in your respect.

FIRST LORD  On my life, my lord, a bubble.

BERTRAM  Do you think I am so far deceived in him?

FIRST LORD  Believe it, my lord. In mine own direct
knowledge, without any malice, but to speak of
him as my kinsman, he's a most notable coward,
an infinite and endless liar, an hourly promise-breaker,
the owner of no one good quality worthy
your Lordship's entertainment.

SECOND LORD  It were fit you knew him, lest, reposing
too far in his virtue, which he hath not, he might
at some great and trusty business in a main danger
fail you.

BERTRAM  I would I knew in what particular action to
try him.

SECOND LORD  None better than to let him fetch off his
drum, which you hear him so confidently undertake
to do.

FIRST LORD  I, with a troop of Florentines, will suddenly
surprise him. Such I will have whom I am sure
he knows not from the enemy. We will bind and
hoodwink him so, that he shall suppose no other
but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversary's
when we bring him to our own tents. Be but
your Lordship present at his examination. If he do
not for the promise of his life, and in the highest
compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you and
deliver all the intelligence in his power against
you, and that with the divine forfeit of his soul
upon oath, never trust my judgment in anything.

SECOND LORD  O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch
his drum. He says he has a stratagem for 't. When
your Lordship sees the bottom of his success in
't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump of ore
will be melted, if you give him not John Drum's
entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed.
Here he comes.

[Enter Parolles.]


FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  O, for the love of laughter,
hinder not the honor of his design. Let him
fetch off his drum in any hand.

BERTRAM, [to Parolles]  How now, monsieur? This
drum sticks sorely in your disposition.

SECOND LORD  A pox on 't! Let it go. 'Tis but a drum.

PAROLLES  But a drum! Is 't but a drum? A drum so
lost! There was excellent command, to charge in
with our horse upon our own wings and to rend
our own soldiers!

SECOND LORD  That was not to be blamed in the command
of the service. It was a disaster of war that
Caesar himself could not have prevented if he had
been there to command.

BERTRAM  Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success.
Some dishonor we had in the loss of that
drum, but it is not to be recovered.

PAROLLES  It might have been recovered.

BERTRAM  It might, but it is not now.

PAROLLES  It is to be recovered. But that the merit of
service is seldom attributed to the true and exact
performer, I would have that drum or another, or
hic jacet.

BERTRAM  Why, if you have a stomach, to 't, monsieur!
If you think your mystery in stratagem can bring
this instrument of honor again into his native
quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise and go
on. I will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit. If
you speed well in it, the Duke shall both speak of it
and extend to you what further becomes his greatness,
even to the utmost syllable of your
worthiness.

PAROLLES  By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.

BERTRAM  But you must not now slumber in it.

PAROLLES  I'll about it this evening, and I will presently
pen down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my
certainty, put myself into my mortal preparation;
and by midnight look to hear further from me.

BERTRAM  May I be bold to acquaint his Grace you are
gone about it?

PAROLLES  I know not what the success will be, my
lord, but the attempt I vow.

BERTRAM  I know thou 'rt valiant, and to the possibility
of thy soldiership will subscribe for thee. Farewell.

PAROLLES  I love not many words.	[He exits.]

FIRST LORD  No more than a fish loves water. Is not this
a strange fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems
to undertake this business which he knows is not
to be done, damns himself to do, and dares better
be damned than to do 't?

SECOND LORD  You do not know him, my lord, as we do.
Certain it is that he will steal himself into a man's
favor and for a week escape a great deal of discoveries,
but when you find him out, you have him
ever after.

BERTRAM  Why, do you think he will make no deed at
all of this that so seriously he does address himself
unto?

FIRST LORD  None in the world, but return with an
invention and clap upon you two or three probable
lies. But we have almost embossed him. You shall
see his fall tonight; for indeed he is not for your
Lordship's respect.

SECOND LORD  We'll make you some sport with the fox
ere we case him. He was first smoked by the old
Lord Lafew. When his disguise and he is parted,
tell me what a sprat you shall find him, which you
shall see this very night.

FIRST LORD  I must go look my twigs. He shall be
caught.

BERTRAM  Your brother he shall go along with me.

FIRST LORD  As 't please your Lordship. I'll leave you.
[He exits.]

BERTRAM
Now will I lead you to the house and show you
The lass I spoke of.

SECOND LORD  But you say she's honest.

BERTRAM
That's all the fault. I spoke with her but once
And found her wondrous cold. But I sent to her,
By this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
Tokens and letters, which she did re-send.
And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature.
Will you go see her?

SECOND LORD  With all my heart, my lord.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Helen and Widow.]


HELEN
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
I know not how I shall assure you further
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.

WIDOW
Though my estate be fall'n, I was well born,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses,
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act.

HELEN  Nor would I wish you.
First give me trust the Count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
Is so from word to word; and then you cannot,
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
Err in bestowing it.

WIDOW  I should believe you,
For you have showed me that which well approves
You're great in fortune.

HELEN  Take this purse of gold,
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will overpay and pay again
When I have found it. The Count he woos your
daughter,
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
Resolved to carry her. Let her in fine consent
As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.
Now his important blood will naught deny
That she'll demand. A ring the County wears
That downward hath succeeded in his house
From son to son some four or five descents
Since the first father wore it. This ring he holds
In most rich choice. Yet, in his idle fire,
To buy his will it would not seem too dear,
Howe'er repented after.

WIDOW
Now I see the bottom of your purpose.

HELEN
You see it lawful, then. It is no more
But that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
Desires this ring, appoints him an encounter,
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Herself most chastely absent. After,
To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns
To what is passed already.

WIDOW  I have yielded.
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With musics of all sorts and songs composed
To her unworthiness. It nothing steads us
To chide him from our eaves, for he persists
As if his life lay on 't.

HELEN  Why then tonight
Let us assay our plot, which, if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed,
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact.
But let's about it.
[They exit.]
