ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence and County Paris.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.

PARIS
My father Capulet will have it so,
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
You say you do not know the lady's mind?
Uneven is the course. I like it not.

PARIS
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little talk of love,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [aside]
I would I knew not why it should be slowed.--
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.

[Enter Juliet.]


PARIS
Happily met, my lady and my wife.

JULIET
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS
That "may be" must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET
What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  That's a certain text.

PARIS
Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET
To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS
Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET
I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS
So will you, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET
If I do so, it will be of more price
Being spoke behind your back than to your face.

PARIS
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.

JULIET
The tears have got small victory by that,
For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS
Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.

JULIET
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.

JULIET
It may be so, for it is not mine own.--
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening Mass?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.--
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS
God shield I should disturb devotion!--
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse you.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.	[He exits.]

JULIET
O, shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past care, past help.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O Juliet, I already know thy grief.
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.

JULIET
Tell me not, friar, that thou hearest of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
[She shows him her knife.]
God joined my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's sealed,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore out of thy long-experienced time
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honor bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hold, daughter, I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That cop'st with death himself to 'scape from it;
And if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.

JULIET
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of any tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears,
Or hide me nightly in a charnel house,
O'ercovered quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud
(Things that to hear them told have made me
tremble),
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hold, then. Go home; be merry; give consent
To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow.
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
[Holding out a vial.]
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilling liquor drink thou off;
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humor; for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
Like death when he shuts up the day of life.
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then, as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
Abate thy valor in the acting it.

JULIET
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [giving Juliet the vial]
Hold, get you gone. Be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET
Love give me strength, and strength shall help
afford.
Farewell, dear father.
[They exit in different directions.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,
two or three.]


CAPULET
So many guests invite as here are writ.
[One or two of the Servingmen exit
with Capulet's list.]
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

SERVINGMAN  You shall have none ill, sir, for I'll try if
they can lick their fingers.

CAPULET  How canst thou try them so?

SERVINGMAN  Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick
his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his
fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET  Go, begone.	[Servingman exits.]
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.--
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?

NURSE  Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.

[Enter Juliet.]


NURSE
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

CAPULET
How now, my headstrong, where have you been
gadding?

JULIET
Where I have learned me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoined
By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here	[Kneeling.]
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you.
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

CAPULET
Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
I'll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.

JULIET
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence' cell
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET
Why, I am glad on 't. This is well. Stand up.
[Juliet rises.]
This is as 't should be.--Let me see the County.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.--
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
All our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?

LADY CAPULET
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.

CAPULET
Go, nurse. Go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.
[Juliet and the Nurse exit.]

LADY CAPULET
We shall be short in our provision.
'Tis now near night.

CAPULET  Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet. Help to deck up her.
I'll not to bed tonight. Let me alone.
I'll play the housewife for this once.--What ho!--
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare up him
Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Juliet and Nurse.]


JULIET
Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle nurse,
I pray thee leave me to myself tonight,
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.

[Enter Lady Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?

JULIET
No, madam, we have culled such necessaries
As are behooveful for our state tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the Nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET  Good night.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
[Lady Capulet and the Nurse exit.]

JULIET
Farewell.--God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.--
Nurse!--What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.	[She takes out the vial.]
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
[She takes out her knife
and puts it down beside her.]
No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
What if it be a poison which the Friar
Subtly hath ministered to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is. And yet methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point.
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place--
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed;
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort--
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad--
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud,
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out my desp'rate brains?
O look, methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon a rapier's point! Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here's drink. I drink to
thee.	[She drinks and falls upon her bed
within the curtains.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.]


LADY CAPULET
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.

NURSE
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

[Enter old Capulet.]


CAPULET
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.
The curfew bell hath rung. 'Tis three o'clock.--
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica.
Spare not for cost.

NURSE  Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed. Faith, you'll be sick tomorrow
For this night's watching.

CAPULET
No, not a whit. What, I have watched ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

LADY CAPULET
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time,
But I will watch you from such watching now.
[Lady Capulet and Nurse exit.]

CAPULET
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!

[Enter three or four Servingmen with spits and logs
and baskets.]

Now fellow,
What is there?

FIRST SERVINGMAN
Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.

CAPULET
Make haste, make haste.	[First Servingman exits.]
Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.

SECOND SERVINGMAN
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

CAPULET
Mass, and well said. A merry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be loggerhead.
[Second Servingman exits.]
Good faith, 'tis day.
The County will be here with music straight,
[Play music.]
For so he said he would. I hear him near.--
Nurse!--Wife! What ho!--What, nurse, I say!

[Enter Nurse.]

Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up.
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Make haste. The bridegroom he is come already.
Make haste, I say.
[He exits.]

Scene 5
=======

NURSE, [approaching the bed]
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet!--Fast, I warrant
her, she--
Why, lamb, why, lady! Fie, you slugabed!
Why, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Why, bride!--
What, not a word?--You take your pennyworths
now.
Sleep for a week, for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little.--God forgive me,
Marry, and amen! How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her.--Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed,
He'll fright you up, i' faith.--Will it not be?
[She opens the bed's curtains.]
What, dressed, and in your clothes, and down
again?
I must needs wake you. Lady, lady, lady!--
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead.--
O, weraday, that ever I was born!--
Some aqua vitae, ho!--My lord! My lady!

[Enter Lady Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET
What noise is here?

NURSE  O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET
What is the matter?

NURSE  Look, look!--O heavy day!

LADY CAPULET
O me! O me! My child, my only life,
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.
Help, help! Call help.

[Enter Capulet.]


CAPULET
For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.

NURSE
She's dead, deceased. She's dead, alack the day!

LADY CAPULET
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead.

CAPULET
Ha, let me see her! Out, alas, she's cold.
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

NURSE
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET  O woeful time!

CAPULET
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.

[Enter Friar Lawrence and the County Paris, with
Musicians.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET
Ready to go, but never to return.--
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law; Death is my heir.
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.

PARIS
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labor of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catched it from my sight!

NURSE
O woe, O woeful, woeful, woeful day!
Most lamentable day, most woeful day
That ever, ever I did yet behold!
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this!
O woeful day, O woeful day!

PARIS
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable death, by thee beguiled,
By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love! O life! Not life, but love in death!

CAPULET
Despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed!
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! My soul and not my child!
Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion,
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced;
And weep you now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love you love your child so ill
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
She's not well married that lives married long,
But she's best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
And in her best array, bear her to church,
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

CAPULET
All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,
And go, Sir Paris. Everyone prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill.
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
[All but the Nurse and the Musicians exit.]

FIRST MUSICIAN
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.

NURSE
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.

FIRST MUSICIAN
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
[Nurse exits.]

[Enter Peter.]


PETER  Musicians, O musicians, "Heart's ease,"
"Heart's ease." O, an you will have me live, play
"Heart's ease."

FIRST MUSICIAN  Why "Heart's ease?"

PETER  O musicians, because my heart itself plays "My
heart is full." O, play me some merry dump to
comfort me.

FIRST MUSICIAN  Not a dump, we. 'Tis no time to play
now.

PETER  You will not then?

FIRST MUSICIAN  No.

PETER  I will then give it you soundly.

FIRST MUSICIAN  What will you give us?

PETER  No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give
you the minstrel.

FIRST MUSICIAN  Then will I give you the
serving-creature.

PETER  Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
your pate. I will carry no crochets. I'll re you, I'll fa
you. Do you note me?

FIRST MUSICIAN  An you re us and fa us, you note us.

SECOND MUSICIAN  Pray you, put up your dagger and
put out your wit.

PETER  Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat
you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger.
Answer me like men.
[Sings.]	When griping griefs the heart doth wound
	And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
	Then music with her silver sound--
Why "silver sound"? Why "music with her silver
sound"? What say you, Simon Catling?

FIRST MUSICIAN  Marry, sir, because silver hath a
sweet sound.

PETER  Prates.--What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

SECOND MUSICIAN  I say "silver sound" because musicians
sound for silver.

PETER  Prates too.--What say you, James Soundpost?

THIRD MUSICIAN  Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER  O, I cry you mercy. You are the singer. I will say
for you. It is "music with her silver sound" because
musicians have no gold for sounding:
[Sings.]	Then music with her silver sound
	With speedy help doth lend redress.
[He exits.]

FIRST MUSICIAN  What a pestilent knave is this same!

SECOND MUSICIAN  Hang him, Jack. Come, we'll in
here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.
[They exit.]
